[BLOG] add 'Scaling asyncio on Free-Threaded Python' post (#922)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/scaling-asyncio-on-free-threaded-python.md

## The GIL and asyncio: A brief recap

Before diving into the details of scaling `asyncio` on the free-threaded build
of CPython, it's important to understand what is Global Interpreter Lock (GIL)
and how it is a significant limitation for `asyncio` in the first place.

The Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) is a global mutex that protects access to
Python objects, preventing multiple threads from executing Python bytecodes at
once. This means that even though you can have multiple threads in a Python
program, only one thread can execute Python code at a time.

`asyncio` uses an event loop as a scheduler to enable highly efficient I/O-bound
concurrency by switching between tasks during non-blocking I/O operations. The
event loop leverages platform-specific support for asynchronous I/O—such as
`epoll` on Linux, `kqueue` on macOS, and `IOCP` on Windows to perform these
operations efficiently. Since only one event loop can run per thread, CPU-bound
tasks, which would otherwise block the event loop, are typically offloaded to
separate threads. However, the GIL limits true parallel execution of Python code
across threads. Hence, even when tasks are offloaded, they still compete for the

> GIL for execution and limits parallelism.

Reviewer: there's a grammar issue in this sentence. You could just make it read "and this limits parallelism" to fix that, but I edited it a little bit and added some more elaboration. Feel free to take it or leave it.

```suggestion
GIL for execution. This lock contention limits parallelism and can tank performance for any CPU-bound workload.
```

The GIL also prevents execution of multiple event loops in parallel running in
different threads. This limits the ability to scale asyncio applications across

> multiple CPU cores because of the limitations of the GIL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multiple CPU cores.
```

IMO this bit is repetitive.

## Scaling `asyncio` on Free-Threaded Python

The free-threaded build of CPython removes the GIL, allowing multiple threads to
execute in parallel. This opens up new possibilities for `asyncio`
applications, enabling them to scale across multiple CPU cores without the
limitations imposed by the GIL. However, this means that `asyncio` needed to be

> adapted to work in a free-threaded environment as it previously relied on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adapted to work in a free-threaded environment, as it previously relied on the
```

> GIL and global state to manage the event loop and tasks and was not thread-safe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GIL and global state and was not thread-safe.
```

This is a bit of a run-on sentence. You could also break it up but I think just deleting this bit is fine.

   cancellation of tasks. The current task can be accessed using
   `asyncio.current_task()`.

Up until now, `asyncio` was designed with the assumption of a single-threaded
environment, and relied on the GIL to manage access to shared state. The current
task state was stored in a global dictionary mapping threads to their current
task, and all tasks were stored in a global `WeakSet`. This scales poorly with
the number of threads in free-threading because of reference counting and
locking contention on these global data structures.

In Python 3.14, I have implemented several changes to fix thread safety of
`asyncio` and enable it to scale effectively on the free-threaded build of
CPython. It is now implemented using lock-free data structures and per-thread
state, allowing for highly efficient task management and execution across
multiple threads. In the general case of multiple event loops running in
parallel, there is no lock contention and scales linearly with the number of
threads.

Here are the key changes:

1. **Per-thread linked list of tasks**:
   Python 3.14 introduces a per-thread circular double linked list implementation

>    for storing tasks instead of global `WeakSet`. The linked list is per-thread,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   for storing tasks instead of a global `WeakSet`. The linked list is per-thread,
```

   meaning that each thread maintains its own list of tasks and allows for
   lock-free addition and removal of tasks. The use of weak references is
   removed entirely which was slow and prone to contention, by instead making

>    tasks responsible for removing themselves from the list when they are done.

Reviewer: Break this up into two sentences:

> Weak references are slow and prone to contention. I removed the need for the global weak reference dictionary by making tasks responsible for removing themselves from the task list when they are done.

   This requires cooperation between task's deallocator and the executing
   threads to ensure that the task is removed from the list before it is freed,
   otherwise a thread could try accessing already freed task. By removing the
   use of weak references, the overhead of reference counting is eliminated

>    entirely and addition/removal of task in the list now requires only updating

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   entirely and addition/removal of a task in the list now requires only updating
```

   the pointers in the linked list.

   This design allows for efficient, lock-free and thread-safe task management

>    and scales well with the number of threads in free-threading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   and scales well on the free-threaded interpreter.
```

I think multithreaded scaling is implied.

2. **Per-thread current task**:
   Python 3.14 stores the current task on the current thread state instead of a

>    global dictionary mapping event loops to their current tasks. By storing the

Reviewer: Maybe something like this instead:

> Instead of storing the current task in a global dictionary, Python 3.14 stores it in the thread state structure, which is local to each thread.

Author: I have reworded it and removed the global dict part which was a bit repetitive and mentioned in the next para well.

>    current task on thread state, the overhead of accessing the current task is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   current task on the thread state, the overhead of accessing the current task is
```

>    reduced, and it allows for lock-free access to the current task while

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   reduced, allowi for lock-free access to the current task while
```

>    avoiding dictionary lookup. It allows for faster switching between tasks
>    which is a very frequent operation in asyncio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   avoiding dictionary lookup. This allows for faster switching between tasks -- a 
   very frequent operation in asyncio.
```

   This design allows for lock-free access to the current task and avoids

>    reference counting and lock contention on the global dictionary.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how easy it is to collect the PRs that went into each of these two items, but maybe if it's a reasonable task you could include links to the PRs that implemented each of these?

Author: Added links to the PRs.

Both of these changes allow `asyncio` to scale linearly with the number of
threads in free-threading, and has significantly improved performance for both
single-threaded and multi-threaded asyncio usage. The standard `pyperformance`

> benchmark suite shows a significant 10–20% improvement in performance while also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
benchmark suite shows a significant 10–20% improvement in single-threaded performance while also
```

Right? Or am I misinterpreting what you mean?

Author: Yes you are right

reducing memory usage.

## Benchmarks

Here are the benchmark results comparing the performance of `asyncio` on the free-threaded

> build with the GIL-enabled build on a 12 core Windows machine:

Reviewer: Is it 6 real cores and 6 hyperthreads? Either way, do you understand why the scaling curve turns over at 6 cores?

By the way, you could try doing this exercise on one of the qgpu machines - they all have at least 24 real cores.

   This allows for faster switching between tasks -- a very frequent operation in asyncio.

   This design allows for lock-free access to the current task and avoids
   reference counting and lock contention on the global dictionary.

   This was implemented in https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/129899.

Both of these changes allow `asyncio` to scale linearly with the number of
threads in free-threading, and has significantly improved performance for both
single-threaded and multi-threaded `asyncio` usage. The standard `pyperformance`
benchmark suite shows a significant 10–20% improvement in single-threaded performance while also
reducing memory usage.

For a deeper dive into the implementation, check out the internal docs for
[asyncio](https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/InternalDocs/asyncio.md).

## Benchmarks

Here are the benchmark results comparing the performance of `asyncio` on the free-threaded
build with the GIL-enabled build on a Windows machine with 6 physical CPU cores and 12 hyper-threads:

- **TCP Benchmark**: This benchmark measures raw TCP performance.

  <figure style={{ textAlign: 'center' }}>
    <img

>       src="/posts/scaling-asyncio-on-free-threaded-python/asyncio_tcp_benchmark.png"

Reviewer 2: The green numbers are really hard to read, and red/green is the most common color combo that cannot be distinguished by people who are color blind. If it's not too much trouble, it'd be nice to regenerate this with better colors. Replacing green with dark blue for example.

Reviewer 2: Much nicer, thanks

>       alt="Comparing performance of asyncio TCP on GIL-enabled vs free-threading build."

Author: I've added it to the figure's caption, thanks.

---
title: 'Scaling asyncio on Free-Threaded Python'
authors: [kumar-aditya]
published: June 24, 2025
description: 'A recap on the work done in Python 3.14 to enable asyncio to scale on the free-threaded build of CPython.'
category: [Community]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/scaling-asyncio-on-free-threaded-python/logo.png
  alt: 'A logo for asyncio.'
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/scaling-asyncio-on-free-threaded-python/logo.png
  imageAlt: 'A logo for asyncio.'
---

# The GIL and asyncio: A Brief Recap

> Before diving into the details of scaling `asyncio` on the free-threaded

Author: Added a new introduction section and also expanded the brief intro of how event loop works.
